Add template type guard docs (#34549)
angular/angular: aio/content/guide/structural-directives.md

  <img src='generated/images/guide/structural-directives/unless-anim.gif' alt="UnlessDirective in action">
</div>

{@a directive-type-checks}

## Improving template type checking for custom directives

You can add template guard properties to your directive definition to help the Angular template type checker find mistakes in the template at compile time, avoiding runtime errors caused by those mistakes.
The guard properties let you inform the template type checker of an expected type, thus improving compile-time type-checking for that template.

> The property `ngTemplateGuard_(someInputProperty)` provides the means to specify a more accurate type for an input property within the template, while `ngTemplateContextGuard` provides the type requirement for the template context.

Reviewer: I suggest rephrasing the last part of this sentence slightly:

```suggestion
The property `ngTemplateGuard_(someInputProperty)` provides the means to specify a more accurate type for an input property within the template, while `ngTemplateContextGuard` declares the type of the template context.
```

This can mean that the type of such expressions is more specific (that is, narrower) inside the template than outside the template.

For example, the `NgIf` implementation uses type-narrowing to ensure that the
template is only instantiated if the input expression to `*ngIf` is truthy.
To specify this, the directive defines a [static property `ngTemplateGuard_ngIf: 'binding`](api/common/NgIf#static-properties).
The `binding` value is a special case for a common kind of type-narrowing where the input expression is evaluated in order to satisfy the type requirement.

To specify a more specific type for an input property to a directive within the template, add a `ngTemplateGuard_xx` property to the directive, where the suffix to the static property name is the `@Input` field name.
The value of the property can be either a general type-narrowing function based on its return type, or the string `"binding"` as in the case of `NgIf`.

For example, consider the following structural directive that takes the result of a template expression as an input.

<code-example language="ts" header="IfLoadedDirective">

> export type Loaded<T> = { type: 'loaded', data: T };

Reviewer: Can the superfluous newline be removed here?

```suggestion
export type Loaded<T> = { type: 'loaded', data: T };
```

export type Loading = { type: 'loading' };
export type LoadingState<T> = Loaded<T> | Loading;
export class IfLoadedDirective<T> {
    @Input('ifLoaded') set state(state: LoadingState<T>) {}

>     static ngTemplateGuard_state<T>(dir: ExampleDirective<T>, expr: LoadingState<T>): expr is Loaded<T> { return true; };

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    static ngTemplateGuard_state<T>(dir: IfLoadedDirective<T>, expr: LoadingState<T>): expr is Loaded<T> { return true; };
```

export interface Person {
  name: string;
}

@Component({
  template: `<div *ifLoaded="state">{{ state.data }}</div>`,
})
export class AppComponent {
  state: LoadingState<Person>;
}

> 

Reviewer: I'm not sure if this is intentional but can this newline be removed?
```suggestion
}
```

</code-example>

> The `*ifLoaded` structural directive should only render the template if its input is in the loaded state.

Reviewer: This depends on the actual implementation that we don't go into, so I would put this more strongly:

```suggestion
The `*ifLoaded` structural directive only renders the template if its input is in the loaded state.
```

> To ensure this, the template of `AppComponent` must narrow the type of `state` to `Loaded<Person>`.  Therefore, the `IfLoadedDirective` declares the static field `ngTemplateGuard_state`, which expresses the narrowing behavior.

Reviewer: Similarly, the template guard declaration does not *ensure* that the implementation does the correct thing. I would formulate it a bit differently:

```suggestion
As such, it is desirable that the type of `state` within `AppComponent`'s template is narrowed to `Loaded<Person>` within the template that is rendered by `*ifLoaded`. Therefore, the `IfLoadedDirective` declares the static field `ngTemplateGuard_state`, which expresses the narrowing behavior.
```

Feel free to tweak that sentence to be more in line with doc writing standards (of which I have no clue)

> The following example shows the two possible type-narrowing methods for a directive with two inputs, whose expression results depend on the values of properties `inputA` and `inputB`.

Reviewer: Question: should we continue to include this example when two real-world examples have been provided above?

  <img src='generated/images/guide/structural-directives/unless-anim.gif' alt="UnlessDirective in action">
</div>

{@a directive-type-checks}

## Improving template type checking for custom directives

> You can add template guard functions to your directive definition to help the Angular template type checker avoid runtime type errors in the template. Use the properties `ngTemplateGuard_xyz` and `ngTemplateContextGuard` to provide specific type requirements. This informs the template type checker of the proper type and improves type-checking for the template.

Reviewer: To me, it's not clear that the usage of _xyz_ in `ngTemplateGuard_xyz` is actually some placeholder for an input property.

I notice it is in fact mentioned in the next section, but could this be considered confusing when only reading this?

See more about [template type checking](guide/template-typecheck).

### Narrowing types for inputs

> If an input of your structural directive can narrow the type of the given expression inside the template, inform the template type checker by adding a static `ngTemplateGuard_xyz` property where `xyz` is the name of the input. The value of this property can be a type-narrowing function based on its return type, or, if the expression itself should be used to narrow the type, the special string `"binding"`.

Reviewer: > where `xyz` is the name of the input

It is important to clarify here that it's the name of the property that the input is bound to, not the input's public name. Example:

```ts
export class MyDir {
  @Input('disabled') set isDisabled(disabled: boolean | string) {}
}
```

In this case, the template guard should be named `ngTemplateGuard_isDisabled` after the name of the property (setter in this case)

  <img src='generated/images/guide/structural-directives/unless-anim.gif' alt="UnlessDirective in action">
</div>

{@a directive-type-checks}

## Improving template type checking for custom directives

> You can add template guard properties to your directive definition to help the Angular template type checker find mistakes in the template at compile time, avoiding runtime errors caused by those mistakes.

Reviewer 2: Let's put the focus on the benefit to the user, instead of the Angular feature. How about:

You can improve template type checking for custom directives by adding template guard properties to your directive definition. These properties help the Angular template type checker find mistakes in the template at compile time, which can avoid runtime errors those mistakes can cause.

(line 840): In addition, these guard properties let you inform the template type checker of an expected type, which can improve compile-time type-checking for that template.

Author: This is not "in addition" -- that is what they do, and all that they do.

Reviewer 2: Then delete "In addition" and start the sentence with "These guard properties"

The guard properties let you inform the template type checker of an expected type, thus improving compile-time type-checking for that template.

> The property `ngTemplateGuard_(someInputProperty)` provides the means to specify a more accurate type for an input property within the template, while `ngTemplateContextGuard` declares the type of the template context.

Reviewer 2: Change _**provides the means to**_ to _**lets you**_

> See examples below.

Reviewer 2: Change _**See examples below**_ to **_See the following sections for examples_**

<div class="alert is-helpful>

>    Learn more about [template type checking](guide/template-typecheck "Template type-checking guide").

Reviewer 2: Change to:

For more information, see [Template type-checking guide](guide/template-typecheck "Template type-checking guide").

</div>

{@a narrowing-input-types}

### Narrowing type requirements for inputs

> A structural directive has control over when the template is rendered, based on its input expressions.

Reviewer 2: But what is the benefit to the user?

> This can mean that the type of such expressions is more specific (that is, narrower) inside the template than outside the template.

Reviewer 2: 1. _**This**_ is ambiguous. This what?
2. Do we need to use the term _**narrower**_, if we are just going to say that it means **_more specific_**?

For example, the `NgIf` implementation uses type-narrowing to ensure that the
template is only instantiated if the input expression to `*ngIf` is truthy.

> To specify this, the directive defines a [static property `ngTemplateGuard_ngIf: 'binding`](api/common/NgIf#static-properties).

Reviewer 2: Again, avoid using _**this**_ on its own. The meaning can be ambiguous.

The value of the property can be either a general type-narrowing function based on its return type, or the string `"binding"` as in the case of `NgIf`.

For example, consider the following structural directive that takes the result of a template expression as an input.

<code-example language="ts" header="IfLoadedDirective">
export type Loaded<T> = { type: 'loaded', data: T };
export type Loading = { type: 'loading' };
export type LoadingState<T> = Loaded<T> | Loading;
export class IfLoadedDirective<T> {
    @Input('ifLoaded') set state(state: LoadingState<T>) {}
    static ngTemplateGuard_state<T>(dir: IfLoadedDirective<T>, expr: LoadingState<T>): expr is Loaded<T> { return true; };
export interface Person {
  name: string;
}

@Component({
  template: `<div *ifLoaded="state">{{ state.data }}</div>`,
})
export class AppComponent {
  state: LoadingState<Person>;
}
</code-example>

In this example, the `LoadingState` type permits either of two states, `Loaded` or `Loading`. The expression used as the directive’s `state` input is of the umbrella type `LoadingState`, as it’s unknown what the loading state is at that point.

> The `IfLoadedDirective` definition declares the static field `ngTemplateGuard_state`, which expresses the narrowing behavior. The `state` input to the directive must be of type `Loaded<T>` to satisfy the type guard.

Reviewer: I think this part is still backwards, I'd probably remove it

```suggestion
The `IfLoadedDirective` definition declares the static field `ngTemplateGuard_state`, which expresses the narrowing behavior.
```

> Within the `AppComponent` template, the `*ifLoaded` structural directive should render this template only when `state` is actually `Loaded<Person>`. The type guard allows the type checker to infer that the type of `state` must be narrower than `LoadingState`, and further infer that `T` must be an instance of `Person`.

Reviewer: Instead of saying "must be narrower than `LoadingState`", we can be more precise:

```suggestion
Within the `AppComponent` template, the `*ifLoaded` structural directive should render this template only when `state` is actually `Loaded<Person>`. The type guard allows the type checker to infer that the type of `state` within the template is a `Loaded<T>`, and further infer that `T` must be an instance of `Person`.
```

  <img src='generated/images/guide/structural-directives/unless-anim.gif' alt="UnlessDirective in action">
</div>

{@a directive-type-checks}

## Improving template type checking for custom directives

You can add template guard properties to your directive definition to help the Angular template type checker avoid runtime type errors in the template.
The guard properties let you inform the template type checker of an expected type, thus improving type-checking for that template.

The property `ngTemplateGuard_(someInputProperty)` provides a type requirement for a specific input property, while `ngTemplateContextGuard` provides the type requirement for a context.
See examples below.

<div class="alert is-helpful>

   Learn more about [template type checking](guide/template-typecheck).

</div>

{@a narrowing-input-types}

### Narrowing types for inputs

> The name of the template-guard property for an input to the directive is  `ngTemplateGuard_xx`,

Author: Can you provide this example?

> The name of the template-guard property for an input to the directive is  `ngTemplateGuard_xx`,

Reviewer: I was mostly referring to this sentence below:

> An example of the `binding` case is the implementation of `*ngIf`. This directive uses the passed expression to narrow the type, because the template should only be instantiated if the expression is truthy.

That would need to be rephrased a bit as the `binding` case would not have been introduced if we move this here.

> The name of the template-guard property for an input to the directive is  `ngTemplateGuard_xx`,

Author: done

### Specific in-template type requirements for inputs

A structural directive in a template controls whether that template is rendered at run time, based on its input expression.

> Inside the template, the type requirement for the input can be a subset of types that might be allowed outside the template.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Therefore, the type of the input expression may be more specific within the template, depending on the behavior of the directive. To avoid false positives during template type checking, a directive can declare the type of an input expression within the template using a type guard function to achieve the desired type narrowing effect.
```

> To help the compiler catch possible run-time type errors, you should specify as closely as possible the required type of the input expression when it occurs inside the template.

Reviewer: I realized that type-narrowing will _not_ prevent runtime errors, but it would result in undesirable errors in templates. With the above suggestion I would drop this sentence.

```suggestion
-
```

The following example shows the two possible type-narrowing methods for a directive with two inputs, whose expression results depend on the values of properties `inputA` and `inputB`.

<code-example language="ts" header="myDirective.ts">

@Directive({…})
export class ExampleDirective {
    @Input() set inputA(val: string | null) {
        this._val = val === null ? '' : val;
    }

    @Input() inputB: boolean;

    // Although the value of inputA can be null, we know that we will never render the
    // template if it is. The following template guard tells the compiler
    // that inside the template, null is not an option.
    static ngTemplateGuard_inputA: (dir: ExampleDirective, expr: string | null): expr is string => true;

    // Using the bound expression itself, [inputB]="person !== null" properly
    // infers that inside the template, "person" can no longer be null.
    static ngTemplateGuard_inputB: 'binding';

    // …
}
</code-example>

{@a narrowing-context-type}

> ### Typing the directive's context

Reviewer: I like this section! :+1:

If your structural directive provides a context to the instantiated template, you can properly type it inside the template by providing a static `ngTemplateContextGuard` function.
The following snippet shows an example of such a function.

<code-example language="ts" header="myDirective.ts">
@Directive({…})
export class ExampleDirective {

>     // Make sure Ivy's template checker knows the type of the context with which the

Reviewer: Is it typical to refer to the *Ivy* template type checker? I'd prefer if this were just "Angular template type checker", or just "template type checker".

    // template of this directive will be rendered

>     static ngTemplateContextGuard(dir: ExampleDirective, ctx: unknown): ctx is ExampleContext => true;

Reviewer: This is also a syntax error, similar to the previous one (but slightly different). Can be fixed as follows:

```suggestion
    static ngTemplateContextGuard(dir: ExampleDirective, ctx: unknown): ctx is ExampleContext { return true; };
```

</div>

{@a narrowing-input-types}

### Narrowing type requirements for inputs

A structural directive has control over when the template is rendered, based on its input expressions.
This can mean that the type of such expressions is more specific (that is, narrower) inside the template than outside the template.

For example, the `*ngIf` implementation uses type-narrowing. This directive uses the value of passed expression itself as the expected type, because the template should only be instantiated if the expression is truthy.

To specify a more accurate type for an input property to a directive within the template, add a  `ngTemplateGuard_xx` property to the directive.
In naming the guard property, *xx* is the name of an input property on which the expression depends.
For example, consider the following structural directive that takes the result of a template expression as an input.

<code-example language="ts" header="Directive with input property">

export type Loaded<T> = { type: 'loaded', data: T };
export type Loading = { type: 'loading' };
export type LoadingState<T> = Loaded<T> | Loading;

> export class ExampleDirective<T> {

Reviewer: Let's rename it to something more accurate:

```suggestion
export class IfLoadedDirective<T> {
```

    @Input('ifLoaded') set state(state: LoadingState<T>) {}

>     static ngTemplateGuard_state<T>(dir: ExampleDirective<T>, expr: LoadingState<T>): expr is Loaded<T> { return true; };

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    static ngTemplateGuard_state<T>(dir: IfLoadedDirective<T>, expr: LoadingState<T>): expr is Loaded<T> { return true; };
```

}
`<div *ifLoaded="state">{{ state.data }}</div>`

</code-example>

Here, the result of the input expression depends on the value of the `state` property.

> To narrow the expected type of the expression within the template, it adds a static property named `ngTemplateGuard_state` to the directive definition.

Reviewer: I find the first sentence here particularly hard to understand and tried to rephrase this section a bit:

```suggestion
In the template of `AppComponent`, it would be desirable for the type of `state` to be narrowed to `Loaded<Person>` as the `*ifLoaded` structural directive only renders the template if its input is in the loaded state. To this effect, the `IfLoadedDirective` declares the static field `ngTemplateGuard_state` that expresses the narrowing behavior.
```

The value of an `ngTemplateGuard_xx` property can be a type-narrowing function based on its return type, or, if the expression itself should be used to narrow the type, the special string `"binding"`.
The implementation of `*ngIf` is an example of the `binding` case.

The following example shows the two possible type-narrowing methods for a directive with two inputs, whose expression results depend on the values of properties `inputA` and `inputB`.

<code-example language="ts" header="myDirective.ts">

@Directive({…})

> export class ExampleDirective {

Reviewer: If the `'binding'` example has been moved to the top, I don't think this separate example has any additional value so it can be removed.

{@a narrowing-input-types}

### Narrowing type requirements for inputs

A structural directive has control over when the template is rendered, based on its input expressions.
This can mean that the type of such expressions is more specific (that is, narrower) inside the template than outside the template.

> For example, the `*ngIf` implementation uses type-narrowing. This directive uses the value of passed expression itself as the expected type, because the template should only be instantiated if the expression is truthy.

Reviewer: Also, I think it would make sense to introduce the `'binding'` case right here with an example, and then follow with the function declaration as it allows for more advanced narrowing effects. We can definitely use `NgIf` as an example here.

export class AppComponent {
  state: LoadingState<Person>;
}
</code-example>

> * The `IfLoadedDirective` definition declares the static field `ngTemplateGuard_state`, which expresses the narrowing behavior. The input to the directive (the `state` property) must have a specific value ("Loaded").

Reviewer: Let's not refer to "values" here, as type checking is all about types, not values.

```suggestion
* The `IfLoadedDirective` definition declares the static field `ngTemplateGuard_state`, which expresses the narrowing behavior. The input to the directive (the `state` property) is expressed to be of type `Loaded<T>` using the return type guard.`
```

> * Within the `AppComponent` template, the `*ifLoaded` structural directive renders the template only if `state` has the value "Loaded".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Within the `AppComponent` template, the `*ifLoaded` structural directive renders the template only if `state` is in the `Loaded` state, which is reflected in the type of `state` being `Loaded<Person>` within the template.
```
